MPs have reacted angrily to news that the official inquiry into the 2003 Iraq War will not report until after the general election.

Inquiry chairman Sir John Chilcot said he could see "no realistic prospect" of publication before the 7 May election.

Deputy Prime Minister Nick Clegg said the delay was "incomprehensible", while former Conservative leader Iain Duncan Smith said it was "disappointing".

Sir John also faces questioning on the delays by a committee of MPs.

Conservative MP Sir Richard Ottaway, chairman of the Commons Foreign Affairs Committee, wrote to Sir John on Tuesday night - before the latest development - asking him to explain why his report has been delayed.

Sir Richard said there could be "no justification whatsoever" for the process taking so long.

'Long enough'
In a letter to Prime Minister David Cameron, Sir John said "very substantial progress" had been made since his last update, but said the process of allowing people criticised to respond was still taking place.

He could give "no accurate estimate" of a completion date but that it would take "some further months".

In his response, Mr Cameron said he would have liked the report to have been published already and criticised the previous government for not establishing it earlier.

The inquiry began its work in 2009 and held its last public hearing in 2011.

It has been looking into the reasons for the UK's involvement in the 2003 US-led invasion which toppled Saddam Hussein and the aftermath of the conflict, which saw UK troops remain in Iraq until 2009.
Mr Clegg said the public would assume the delay was caused by those criticised in the report attempting to "sex it down".

"The public have waited long enough and will find it incomprehensible that the report is not being published more rapidly than the open-ended timetable you have now set out," he said.

Although the inquiry has never publicly set a deadline for publication, it has been plagued by delays with lengthy wrangling over what documents can be included in the final report.

line
Analysis
Nick Robinson, BBC political editor

Delayed again. Until after the election. Very suspicious say those who fear a cover up of the decisions taken by Tony Blair's government which led the UK to join George W. Bush's invasion of Iraq.

Nick Clegg - whose Liberal Democrat party opposed the war in the face of combined Labour and Conservative support for it - says that some will fear that the report of the Iraq Inquiry is being "sexed down".

Few if any of those facing criticism in the report will speak publicly but I've been speaking to those familiar with what's going on behind the scenes.

Read more from Nick

line
The inquiry reached an agreement last summer with the UK government in which it would be allowed to refer to the "gist" of conversations and private correspondence between former Prime Minister Tony Blair and former US President George Bush.

Conservative former Attorney General Dominic Grieve told BBC News Sir John should explain the "sequencing" of the process to reassure MPs and the public.
The US-led invasion of Iraq started on 19 March 2003 with a "shock-and-awe" campaign intended as a show of force
The US and the UK claimed Iraqi leader Saddam Hussein had weapons of mass destruction he was capable of using
The capital Baghdad fell in April and US President George W Bush declared "mission accomplished" weeks later
Saddam Hussein was captured, tried by the new Iraqi government and hanged. Insurgency continued
British forces ended combat operations in 2009 and the US did so the following year
A total of 179 UK service personnel and nearly 4,500 US soldiers were killed in the conflict
British-based organisation Iraq Body Count estimates 134,400 to 151,652 Iraqi civilians died since 2003, and United Nations estimates 18,805 between 2008-12 - all counts and estimates of Iraqi deaths are highly disputed
The Chilcot inquiry into the UK's role in the war was established by Prime Minister Gordon Brown in 2009
line
Mr Duncan Smith, the work and pensions secretary, added: "People are waiting for an answer to some of these unanswered questions."

SNP depute leader Stewart Hosie said he was "deeply frustrated and incredibly disappointed" by the delay.

Rose Gentle, whose soldier son Gordon was killed in Iraq in 2004, said families were "really frustrated" at the drawn-out process.

She added: "We just feel constantly let down. We can't get over something like this until we find out."

Mr Cameron has spoken of his "immense frustration" at the progress of the inquiry but said that its work is independent and it would be wrong of him to intervene.

Mr Blair, one of more than 100 witnesses to have appeared before the inquiry, has insisted he is not responsible for the delays and wants the report to be made public as soon as possible.

A Labour spokesman said: "Labour established the Chilcot inquiry because it is crucial we learn the lessons of Iraq.

"While the timing is a formal matter for Sir John Chilcot we have always said the inquiry should report as soon as practically possible."

Former Lib Dem Home Office minister Norman Baker said a backbench debate on the inquiry would still go ahead on Thursday next week.

The motion - sponsored by Mr Baker, David Davis, Fabian Hamilton and Caroline Lucas - calls for the inquiry to publish its findings by 12 February.